# Windsurf IDE

### VSCode Features

Windsurf is built on VS Code and retains all of its core features.

- 1. File explorer
- 2. Search
- 3. Source control
- 4. Debug
- 5. Remote Explorer
- 6. Extensions

## Windsurf Features

### 1. Settings (Top-Right->Windsurf Settings->Cascade Settings)

- Auto Execution: If terminal command auto-execution is enabled, Cascade will auto-run commands in the allowlist and ask for permission for commands in the denylist, with the denylist taking precedence.

- Auto-Continue: When enabled, Windsurf will automatically continue its response when it reaches its per-response invocation limit. Upon doing so, this will consume the selected model's credit cost. If this setting is off, Cascade will instead prompt you to continue upon reaching the limit.

- Auto-Generate Memories: When enabled, Cascade will autonomously generate memories to remember important context. When disabled, Cascade will only create memories when you explicitly ask.

- Auto-Open Edited Files: Open files in the background if Cascade creates or edits them

- Cascade Auto-Fix Lints: When enabled, Cascade is given awareness of lint errors created by its edits and may fix them without explicit user prompting. Note that this may increase Cascade's tool usage.

- Cascade Gitignore Access: Allow Cascade to view and edit the files in .gitignore.

- Disable InstantContext Agent (Beta): Disable the experimental InstantContext agent that executes parallel searches as a subagent.

- Enable Cascade Web Tools: When enabled, Cascade can search the web for relevant information and read URLs you paste in.

### 2.Terminal

- Read context from the terminal
- Run commands in the terminal

### 3.Tab
- Autocomplete
- Supercomplete
- Tab to import
- Tab to jump


### 4. File In The Middle-FIM (Ctrl+I)

In your current file, use `Ctrl+I` to ask Cascade generate something.

### 5. Winsurf Review (/windsurf)
A GitHub integration that allows you to review and merge pull requests. By comment `/windsurf` in your pull request, Windsurf will review the pull request and provide feedback.

### 6. AI Commit Messages

### 7. DeepWiki (Ctrl+Shift+Click)
- At mention

### 8. Vibe and replace (Ctrl+Shift+F)

## Cascade Features (Ctrl+L)

### 1. Models
- Support multiple providers: OpenAI, Anthropic, DeepSeek, Qwen, etc.
- Support multiple types of models: Generative, Multi-modal, etc.
- Support free model: SWE-1

### 2. Cascade Chat / Cascade Code

### 3. Planning Mode / Todo Lists

In the background, a specialized planning agent continuously refines the long-term plan while your selected model focuses on taking short-term actions based on that plan.
 
Instead of a markdown file, Cascade will create a Todo list within the conversation. To make changes to the plan, simply ask Cascade to make updates to the Todo list. Cascade may also automatically make updates to the plan as it picks up new information, such as a Memory, during the course of a conversation.

### 4. Context Awareness

Windsurf’s context engine builds a deep understanding of your codebase, past actions, and next intent. It uses an optimized RAG approach (M-Query) for better suggestions and fewer inaccuracies. Therefore, Windsurf and Cascade are aware of your real-time actions, removing the need to prompt with context on your prior actions. Simply instruct Cascade to “Continue”.

### 5. Rules / Workflow / Memory

- Rules help guide the behavior of Cascade. Note that `.windsurfrules` is being deprecated in favor of individual `.windsurf/rules` files. There are Global Rules define how Cascade behaves across all your workspaces. Use this file to provide specific context and set specific guidelines for Cascade (`~/.codeium/windsurf/memories/global_rules.md`) and Workspace Rules (`.windsurf/rules/*.md`) with 4 activation mode: **Manual** (This rule can be manually activated by using `@-mention` in Cascade's input box), **Always On** (This rule will always be applied), **Model Decision** (Model decides whether to apply the rule), **Glob** (This rule applies to files matching the glob pattern). With using rules, you can easily commit rules to version control, share rules with others, and delete out-of-date rules.

- Workflows are saved prompts that Cascade can follow (`.windsurf/workflows/*.md`). To trigger a workflow, type `/` in Cascade. There are also Global Workflows and Workspace Workflows. There are **Safe Mode** (Terminal commands in this workflow will request user confirmation before executing) and **Turbo Mode** (Terminal commands in this workflow will be executed automatically). You can call other Workflows from within a Workflow, for example, `/workflow-1` can include instructions like “Call `/workflow-2`” and “Call `/workflow-3`”.

- Memories are automatically generated by Cascade to maintain context between conversations. You can simply ask Cascade to create a memory to remember important context by saying "Remember this".

[windsurf.run](https://windsurf.run/) Are a place to discover windsurf rules, mcp servers and more. If you want to explore a curated collection of rules and MCP servers.

### 6. Model Context Protocol (MCP)

MCP (Model Context Protocol) is a protocol that enables LLMs to access custom tools and services. An MCP client (Cascade, in this case) can make requests to MCP servers to access tools that they provide. Cascade now natively integrates with MCP, allowing you to bring your own selection of MCP servers for Cascade to use.

You can select MCP servers from MCP Marketplace or add your own MCP servers into `~/.codeium/windsurf/mcp_config.json` file and reload Cascade. The `~/.codeium/windsurf/mcp_config.json` file is a JSON file that contains a list of servers that Cascade can connect to. The JSON should follow the same schema as the config file for Claude Desktop. Here’s an example configuration, which sets up a single server for GitHub:

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "github": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": [
        "-y",
        "@modelcontextprotocol/server-github"
      ],
      "env": {
        "GITHUB_PERSONAL_ACCESS_TOKEN": "<YOUR_PERSONAL_ACCESS_TOKEN>"
      }
    }
  }
}
```
A mcp server project usually allow  you to connect into remote server or you can run it locally. For example:

- Context7 Remote Server Connection

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "context7": {
      "serverUrl": "https://mcp.context7.com/mcp",
      "headers": {
        "CONTEXT7_API_KEY": "YOUR_API_KEY"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

- Windsurf Local Server Connection

```json
{
  "mcpServers": {
    "context7": {
      "command": "npx",
      "args": ["-y", "@upstash/context7-mcp", "--api-key", "YOUR_API_KEY"]
    }
  }
}
```
Here is a list of Online MCP marketplaces that you can use:

- [Smithery](https://smithery.ai/)
- [MCPMarket](https://mcpmarket.com/)
- [OpenTools](https://opentools.com/)
- [MCP Servers](https://mcpservers.org/)
- [MCP.so](https://mcp.so/)

See the official [MCP server reference repository](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/servers). Windsurf integrated MCP Marketplace (top-left corner) to provide a list of MCP servers that you can use.

### 7. Named Checkpoints and Reverts

You have the ability to revert changes that Cascade has made. Simply hover your mouse over the original prompt and click on the revert arrow on the right.

You can also revert directly from the table of contents. This will revert all code changes back to the state of your codebase at the desired step.

You can also create a named snapshot/checkpoint of the current state of your project from within the conversation, which you can easily navigate to and revert at any time.

### 8. @-mention

Windsurf takes multiple relevant sources of context into conversation. Includes:

- Web `@web`: Cascade can search or read URLs you paste in. But you can also force Cascade to do web search by using `@web` in Cascade's input box.

- Code Context Items `@codeContext`

- Files `@file`

- Directories `@directory`

- Terminal `@terminal`

- Docs `@docs`: References to documentation or external content that you want to include in the conversation. This can include API documentation, project documentation, or any other relevant reference materials.

- Rules `@rules`: Add rules you defined in `.windsurf/rules/*.md` to the conversation.

- MCP servers: `@mcp`: Add MCP servers you defined in `~/.codeium/windsurf/mcp_config.json` to the conversation.

- Knowledge `@knowledge`: (Teams/Enterprise only) Pulls in Google Docs as shared context for the entire team. Admins can connect Google Drive and add up to 50 Google Docs as team knowledge sources. These docs are accessible to all team members regardless of individual Google Drive access controls.

- Conversations `@conversation`: Allows users to include previous conversation in the context of the current conversation.

- Codemap `@codemaps`: Allows users to include codemap in the context of the current conversation.

### 9. Queued Messages

While you are waiting for Cascade to finish its current task, you can queue up new messages to execute in order once the task is complete. To add a message to the queue, simply type in your message while Cascade is working and press `Enter`.

- Send immediately: Press Enter again on an empty text box to send it right away.
- Delete: Remove any message from the queue before it’s sent

### 10. Response Actions

- Render mermaid diagram
- Copy the content of the response
- View the statistics of the response
- Create a snapshot/checkpoint
- Generate a codemap

### 11. Linter integration

Cascade can automatically fix linting errors on generated code. This is turned on by default, this edit will not consume any credits.

### 12. Upload image

Cascade allows you to upload image as input to the model.

### 13. App Deploy

App Deploys lets you deploy web applications and sites directly within Windsurf through Cascade tool calls. This feature helps you share your work through public URLs, update your deployments, and claim projects for further customization. This feature is in beta and support for additional frameworks, more robust builds, etc. are coming soon. With App Deploys, you can:

- Deploy a website or JS web app to a public domain
- Re-deploy to the same URL after making changes
- Claim the project to your personal account

App Deploys works with most popular JavaScript frameworks, including: Next.js, React, Vue, Svelte, Static HTML/CSS/JS sites.

When you use App Deploys, your code is uploaded to our server and deployed to the provider under our umbrella account. The deployed site will be available at a public URL formatted as `<SUBDOMAIN_NAME>.windsurf.build`. To deploy your application, simply ask Cascade something like:

```
"Deploy this project to Netlify"
"Update my deployment"
```

### 14. Browser Integration (deprecated)

Cascade can access to browser. For example, you can chat with Cascade about tabs that are open in the browser using @-mentions, and Cascade can take screenshots and retrieve DOM trees.

### 15. Previews

Previews let you view your app’s local deployment inside the IDE or in a browser, with listeners that enable rapid iteration. You can select UI elements or errors in the Preview and send them to Cascade (via the “Send element” button) as context. Windsurf opens the Preview as a tabbed web view, so you can inspect the app alongside the Cascade panel.

### 16. Sharing your conversation (Team level)

### 17. Voice input

### 18. Ignoring files

If you’d like Cascade to ignore files, you can add your files to `.codeiumignore` at the root of your workspace. This will prevent Cascade from viewing, editing or creating files inside of the paths designated. You can declare the file paths in a format similar to `.gitignore`.